# The CIA triad and other key concepts

## Introduction
- What is cybersecurity?
- What is the cybersecurity CIA triad?
- What are authenticity, nonrepudiation and privacy in the context of cybersecurity?


## What is cybersecurity?
   - Cybersecurity, also known as information security
   - **The practice of protecting computer systems, networks, devices, and data from digital attacks, unauthorized access, damage, or theft.**
   - The primary goal of cybersecurity is to ensure the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of digital assets and information.
   - Cybersecurity professionals design and implement security controls to protect assets, data and information
   - As more and more of our lives have become digitized and online, cybersecurity has become a top concern for both private individuals and organizations.

## What is the cyber security CIA triad?
  The cyber security triad refers to the model that incorporates the three main considerations for any cybersecurity work or designing a system/environment:

### Confidentiality
   - **confidentiality is the process of protecting data and information from unauthorized access attempts**
   - **protecting the accuracy and trustworthiness of data contained within environments and not allowing the data to be altered or amended by unauthorized individuals.**

### Integrity
   - **Integrity is the ability to ensure that a system and its data has not suffered unauthorized modification.**

### Availability
   - **Availability means data are accessible when you need them**


## What are authenticity, nonrepudiation and privacy in the context of cyber security?

These are additional important concepts that relate to ensuring the security and trustworthiness of systems and data:

**Authenticity** 
   - The assurance that the information, communication, or entity you are interacting with is genuine and has not been tampered with or altered by unauthorized parties.

**Nonrepudiation** 
   - is the concept of ensuring that a party cannot deny their involvement or the authenticity of a transaction or communication.
   - It prevents someone from claiming they didn't send a message or perform a particular action when there is evidence to the contrary.

**Privacy** 
   - refers to the protection of sensitive and personally identifiable information from unauthorized access, use, disclosure, or manipulation.
   - It involves controlling who has access to personal data and how that data is collected, stored, and shared. 






   
